                    ENGLAND'S 17th CENTURY REVOLUTION 
 
                    by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
 
               A Review of Francois Guizot's 1850 pamphlet 
          _Pourquoi la revolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle reussi?_ 
 
                Published in _Politisch-Okonomische Revue_ 
                       Second Issue, February 1850 
 
 
In this pamphlet, M. Guizot [1784-1874, French historian; one-time head 
of government] intends to prove that Louis Philippe and the politics 
pursued by M. Guizot should not really have been overthrown on February 
24, 1848, and that only the wicked character of the French is to be 
blamed for the fact that the July Monarchy of 1830, after an existence 
of 18 troublesome years, collapsed so ignominiously and did not acquire 
the endurance that the English monarchy has enjoyed since 1688.  
 
Reading this pamphlet, one realized that even the ablest men of the 
ancien regime, as well as men who cannot be denied certain historical 
talents, have become so confused by the fateful events of that February 
that they have lost all sense of history and, indeed, no longer 
understand their previous actions.  Instead of gaining, from the 
experience of the February Revolution, some insight into the totally 
different historical situation and into the entirely different position 
that the classes occupy in society under the French Monarchy of 1830 and 
under the English Monarchy of 1688, M. Guizot dissolves these 
difference with a few moralistic phrases and asserts in conclusion that 
the policy overthrown on February 24 was "only one that could master the 
revolution, in the same way that it had controlled the state".  
 
Specifically formulated, the question M. Guizot sets out to answer is: 
Why did bourgeois society in England develop as a constitutional 
monarchy longer than it did in France? 
 
Characteristic of M. Guizot's knowledge of the course of bourgeois 
development in England is the following passage: 
 
     "Under George I and George II, the public spirit took a different 
     direction: Foreign policy ceased to be the major interest; internal 
     administration, the maintenance of peace, financial, colonial, and 
     commercial questions, and the development and struggle for 
     parliamentary government became the major issues occupying the 
     government and the public." 
 
M. Guizot finds in the reign of William III only two points worth 
mentioning: the preservation of the balance of power between Parliament 
and crown, and the preservation of the European balance of power through 
the wars against Louis XIV.  Under the Hanoverian dynasty, "public 
opinion suddenly takes a "different direction", nobody knows how or why.  
Here one sees how M. Guizot superimposes the most commonplace phrases 
of French parliamentary debates on English history, believing he has 
thereby explained it.  In the same way, Guizot also imagines that, as 
French Prime Minister, he carried on his shoulders the responsibility of 
preserving the proper equilibrium between Parliament and crown, as well 
as the European balance of power, and in reality he did nothing but 
huckster French society away piecemeal to the moneyed Jews of the Paris 
 
M. Guizot does not think it worth mentioning that the struggle against 
Louis XIV was simply a war of competition aimed at the destruction of 
French naval power and commerce; nor does he mention the rule of the 
finance bourgeoisie through the establishment of the Bank of England 
under William III, nor the introduction of the public debt which then 
received its first sanction, nor that the manufacturing bourgeoisie 
received a new impetus by the consistent application of a system of 
protective tariffs.  For Guizot, only political phrases are meaningful.  
He does not even mention that under Queen Anne the ruling parties could 
preserve themselves, as well as the constitutional monarchy, only by 
forcibly extending the term of Parliament to seven years, thus all but 
destroying any influence the people might have had on government.  
 
Under the Hanoverian dynasty, England had already reached a stage of 
development where it could fight its wars of competition against France 
with modern means.  England herself challenged France directly only in 
America and the East Indies, whereas on the Continent she contended 
herself with paying foreign sovereigns, such as Frederick II, to wage 
war against France.  And while foreign policy assumed such a new form, 
M. Guizot has this to say: "Foreign policy ceased to be the major 
interest", being replaced by "the maintenance of peace".  Regarding the 
statement that the "development and struggle for parliamentary 
government" became a major concern, one may recall the incidents of 
corruption under the Walpole Ministry, which, indeed, resemble very 
closely the scandals that became daily events under M. Guizot.  
 
The fact that the English Revolution developed more successfully than 
the French can be attributed, according to M. Guizot, to two factors: 
first, that the English Revolution had a thoroughly religious character, 
and hence in mo way broke with all past traditions; and second, that 
from the very beginning it was not destructive but constructive, 
Parliament defending the old existing laws against encroachment by the 
crown.  
 
In regard to the first point, M. Guizot seems to have forgotten that 
the free-thinking philosophy which makes him shudder so terribly when he 
sees it in the French Revolution was imported to France from no other 
country than England.  Its father was Locke, and in Shaftesbury and 
Bolingbroke it had already achieved that ingenious form which later 
found such a brilliant development in France, We thus arrive at the 
strange conclusion that the same free-thinking philosophy which, 
according to M. Guizot, wrecked the French Revolution, was one of the 
most essential products of the religious English Revolution.  
 
In regard to the second point, Guizot completely forgets that the French 
Revolution, equally conservative, began even more conservatively than 
the English.  Absolutism, particularly as it finally appeared in France, 
was an innovation there too, and it was against this innovation that the 
parlements [French Diets] revolted to defend the old laws, the _us et 
coutumes_ [usages and customs] of the old monarchy with its Estates 
General.  And whereas the French Revolution was to revive the old 
Estates General that had quietly died since Henry IV and Louis XIV, the 
English Revolution, on the contrary, could show no comparable 
classical-conservative element.  
 
According to M. Guizot, the main result of the English Revolution was 
that it made it impossible for the king to rule against the will of 
Parliament and the House of COmmons.  Thus, to him, the whole revolution 
consists only of this: that in the beginning both sides, crown and 
Parliament, overstep their bounds and go too far, until they finally 
find their proper equilibrium under William III and neutralize each 
other.  M. Guizot finds it superfluous to mention that the subjection 
of the crown to Parliament meant subjection to the rule of a class.  Nor 
does he think it necessary to deal with the fact that this class won the 
necessary power in order finally to make the crown its servant.  
According to him, the whole struggle between Charles I and Parliament 
was merely over purely political privileges.  Not a word is said about 
why the Parliament, and the class represented in it, needed these 
privileges.  Nor does Guizot talk about Charles I's interference with 
free competition, which made England's commerce and industry 
increasingly impossible; nor about the dependence on Parliament into 
which Charles I, in his continuous need for money, feel the more deeply 
the more he tried to defy it.  Consequently, M. Guizot explains the 
revolution as being merely due to the ill will and religious fanaticism 
of a few troublemakers who would not rest content with moderate freedom.  
Guizot is just as little able to explain the interrelationship between 
the religious movement and the development of bourgeois society.  To 
him, of course, the Republic [Crowmwell's] is likewise the work of a 
mere handful of ambitious and malicious fanatics.  Nowhere does he 
mention the attempts made to establish republics in Lisbon, Naples, and 
Messina at that time -- attempts following the Dutch example, as England 
did.  
 
Although M. Guizot never loses sight of the French Revolution, he does 
not even reach the simple conclusion that the transition from an 
absolute to a constitutional monarchy can take place only after violent 
struggles and passing through a republican stage, and that even then the 
old dynasty, having become useless, must make way for a usurpatory side 
line.  Hence, Guizot can say only the most trivial commonplaces about 
the overthrow of the English Restoration monarchy.  He does not even 
cite the most immediate causes: the fear on the part of the great new 
landowners, who had acquired property before the restoration of 
Catholicism -- property robbed from the church -- which they would have 
to change hands; the aversion of the commercial and industrial 
bourgeoisie to Catholicism, a religion in now way suitable for its 
commerce; the nonchalance with which the Stuarts, for their own and 
their courtier's benefit, sold all of England's industry and commerce to 
the French government, that is, to the only country then in a position 
to offer England dangerous and often successful competition, etc.  Since 
M. Guizot omits the most momentous points, there is nothing left for 
him but the highly unsatisfactory and banal narration of mere political 
events.  
 
For M. Guizot, the great mystery is the conservative nature of the 
English Revolution, which he can ascribe only to the superior 
intelligence of the English, whereas in fact it can be found in the 
enduring alliance between the bourgeoisie and a great part of the 
landowners, an alliance that constitutes the major difference between it 
and the French Revolution, which destroyed the great landholdings with 
its parcelization policy.  The English class of great landowners, allied 
with the bourgeoisie -- which, incidentally, had already developed under 
Henry VIII -- did not find itself in opposition -- as did the French 
feudal landowners in 1789 -- but rather in complete harmony with the 
vital requirements of the bourgeoisie.  In fact, their lands were not 
feudal but bourgeois property.  On the one hand, there were able to 
provide the industrial bourgeoisie with the manpower necessary for 
manufacturing, and on the other they were able to develop agriculture to 
the standards consonant with industry and commerce.  Thus their common 
interests with the bourgeoisie, thus their alliance with it.  
 
For Guizot, English history ends with the consolidation of the 
constitutional monarchy.  For him, everything that follows is limited to 
a pleasant alternating game between Tories and Whigs, that is, to the 
great debate between M. Guizot and M. Thiers.  In reality, however, 
the consolidation of the constitutional monarchy is only the beginning 
of the magnificent development and transformation of bourgeois society 
in England.  Where M. Guizot sees only gentle calm and idyllic peace, 
in reality the most violent conflicts and the most penetrating 
revolutions are taking place.  Under the constitutional monarchy, 
manufacturing at first expands to an extent hitherto unknown, only to 
make way for heavy industry, the steam engine, and the colossal 
factories.  Whole classes of the population disappear, to be replaced by 
new ones, with new living conditions and new requirements.  A new, more 
gigantic bourgeoisie comes into existence; while the old bourgeoisie 
fights with the French Revolution, the new one conquers the world 
market.  It becomes so all-powerful that even before the Reform Bill 
gives it direct political power, it forces its opponents to enact 
legislation entirely in conformity with _its_ interest and _its_ needs.  
It wins direct representation in Parliament and uses it for the 
destruction of the last remnants of real power left to the landowners.  
It is, finally, at the present moment engaged in a thorough demolition 
of the beautiful codes of the English Constitution, which M. Guizot so 
admires.  
 
And while M. Guizot compliments the English for the fact that the 
reprehensible excesses of French social life, republicanism and 
socialism, have not destroyed the foundations of their sanctified 
monarchy, the class antagonisms of English society have actually reached 
a height not found anywhere else, and the bourgeoisie, with its 
incomparable wealth and productive powers, confronts a proletariat which 
likewise has incomparable power and concentration.  The respect that M.  
Guizot offers to England finally adds up to the fact that, under the 
protection of the constitutional monarchy, more, and more radical, 
elements of social revolutions have developed than in all other 
countries of the world together.  
 
At the point where the threads of English history come together in a 
knot, when M. Guizot cannot even pretend to cut with mere political 
phrases, he takes refuge in religious catchwork, in God's armed 
intervention.  Thus, for example, the holy spirit suddenly descends on 
the army and prevents Cromwell from declaring himself king.  Before his 
conscience, Guizot saves himself through God, before his profane public, 
he does so through his style.  
 
In reality, not only do _les rois s'en vont_ [the kings depart] but also 
_les capacites de la bourgeoisie s'en vont_ [the capacities of the 
bourgeoisie disappear].  